													SIEM101
Security information and event management (SIEM) is a security solution that collects and interprets data within the organization and then detects potential threats.
log collection process is one of the most important parts of the SIEM architecture, because without the log SIEM would be useless.
Logs are generally collected in the following 2 ways: Log Agents, Agent-less
Log Agent(logging software) - Agents often have parsing, log rotation, buffering, log integrity, encryption, conversion features. In other words, this agent software can take action on the logs it collects before forwarding them to the target.
Pros - Tested, working application by the developers, has additional features like automatic parsing, encryption, log integrity, etc. 	Cons - Cost resources
Syslog Format: Timestamp - Source Device - Facility - Severity - Message Number - Message Text.
Agentless - Agentless log sending process is sometimes preferred as there is no installation and update cost. Usually, logs are sent by connecting to the target with SSH or WMI.
Splunk: universal forwarder
ArcSight: ArcSight Connectors
Log Aggregation - The first place where the generated logs are sent is the log aggregator. We can edit the logs coming here before sending them to the destination.
EPS - event per seconds. Formula is events/time period of seconds. Ex. 1000 logs in 5 seconds = 1000/5 = 200 EPS
More than one aggregator can be added so that the incoming logs do not load the same aggregator each time. And sequential or random selection can be provided.
The log coming to the Aggregator is processed and then directed to the target. This process can be parsing, filtering, and enrichment.
In some cases, you need to edit the incoming log. For example, while the date information of most logs you collect comes in the format dd-mm-yyyy, if it comes from a single source as mm-dd-yyyy, you would want to convert that log.
 Another example, you may need to convert UTC + 2 incoming time information to UTC + 1.
Log Enrichment can be done to increase the efficiency of the collected logs and to save time. Example enrichments: Geolocation, DNS, Add/Remove
The geolocation of the specified IP address can be found and added to the log. Thus, the person viewing the log saves time. It also allows you to analyze location-based behavior.
With DNS queries, the IP address of the domain can be found or the IP address can be found by doing reverse DNS.
One of the common mistakes made in SIEM structures is to focus on storage size. High-sized storage is important, as well as the speed of accessing this data.
Our purpose is to access data as quickly as possible. For this, WORM (write once read many) based technologies are more suitable to be used in SIEM.
Speed is important in data storage because it lets us query it faster.
Log -> Log aggregator (modifier) -> Storage -> Alert
Timely occurrence of alerts varies depending on our search speed. For a log created today, we want to create a warning immediately instead of generating an alert after 2 days.
The alarms we will create for SIEM will usually be suspicious and need to be investigated. This means that the alert must be optimized and not triggered in large numbers (except in exceptional cases).
Ways to create an alert - By searching stored data, Creating alarms while taking logs
Example alerts that can be created: New user added to global administrator, 15 Login failed in 3 minutes with the same IP address
Blacklist - It can be used to catch undesirable situations. For example, we can collect the prohibited process names (Example: mimikatz.exe) and write them to a list. Then, if a process in this list appears in the logs, we can create an alert.
Whitelist - Unlike blacklist, it is used for desired situations. For example, a list of IP addresses with normal communication can be kept. If communication is made with an address other than this list, we can generate an alert. List needs to be constantly updates.
Long Tail Log Analysis - This method assumes that the behaviors that occur constantly are normal. In other words, if an "Event ID 4624 An account was successfully logged on" log is constantly occurring on a device, with this method we should take it as normal and approach the least occurring logs with suspicion.
